wow has there been a major shift in the
algorithm this is not your typical shift
you already know that's why you probably
stumbled upon this episode to build your
tribe everyone whether it's Instagram or
Tik Tok is experiencing a major shift in
the algorithm and in some cases it's
exciting because you're reaching new
followers but in many cases it's
depressing and you probably feel like
walking away entirely from social media
but wait don't do that that's not a good
idea in this episode I'm going to share
with you what it actually means and how
we can take advantage of this shift in
the algorithm while we're experiencing
what to do about it to help your
business grow in the meantime and not
lose your
mind hey my name is shelene Johnson and
thank you so much for joining me in this
edition of build your tribe we and by we
I mean myself and my co-host Brock
Johnson we have a podcast called build
your tribe and one of the things that we
focus on is helping you to grow your
business in social media giving you lots
of different tips strategies to to grow
whether you are a a solo entrepreneur or
a a small entrepreneur with a a growing
team but Brock and I together operate a
Instagram coaching program what's it's
actually a membership and the reason why
we made it a membership is because
Instagram changes all the time one
really nice aspect of having a program
like this is we're constantly able
to PLL and to have regular conversations
with our thousands and thousands of
members and they're actively excited and
actively reporting to us what they're
experiencing on Instagram and most of us
at the end of 2024 as we're beginning
2025 you've probably already recognized
a massive decline in vanity metrics so
what are vanity metrics they are your
likes your comments and new followers so
if you have it feels like Instagram
specifically has it out for you and it
is like pulling teeth to get a new
follower on Instagram guess what you are
not alone there's something going on
right now with the algorithm and I at
first I thought it was just my account
but because we have an opportunity to
talk to so many of our members and so
many other people with small followings
large followings you know middle siiz
like whether it's 10,000 or 50,000 or
500,000 or over a million a Ross the
board I've heard this from absolutely
every person that I've pulled and that
is it feels like crickets and it can be
really discouraging I mean I I've talked
to friends even just today in
preparation for this episode and one of
my friends and she's just about to crack
the million followers Mark and she's
like I I'm so over it I'm so done I hate
it like nothing is working she's like go
take a look at my stats like nothing is
working well what we're experiencing is
a a very real shift not just just in the
social media on Instagram but this is
happening on Tik Tok this is happening
on YouTube it's happening across all
platforms so first let me just explain
that CU I think it's going to help you
realize the problem isn't you and then
we'll talk about what to do about it
well first of all just everybody has a
social media account and multiple
accounts that's number one number two
things have changed wildly from when you
first got on Instagram or first got on
Tik Tok and you enjoyed following people
right were hoping to see more of their
content but now most of us and if you
just ask yourself like what does it take
for you to follow someone back in the
day like you you know you tried to
follow everyone who seemed interesting
now it's like you you come across a
great piece of content and even if
you're like this is awesome this is
funny this is relatable even if you
share it the likelihood that you're
going to follow that person or that
account is so low because most of us
already feel quite overwhelmed by the
amount of content that's coming at us
and knowing we still have to save time
to create content
ourselves so the behaviors of all of us
not just your followers but you and I
the way that we consume content is very
different most of us just don't want to
follow anyone anymore unless it's like
we I just cannot miss this person's
content then we're going to follow we're
also going to follow someone if we're
like we want to get on their radar then
you're going to follow them if somebody
says follow for more fill-in-the blank
you're more likely to follow but most of
us we just consume the content we enjoy
it and we think we're probably going to
see more of it and we've all also
experienced like either subscribing
Maybe on YouTube or following someone on
Instagram or following someone on Tik
Tok and then you never see their content
again now if you look at the Instagram's
Explorer page if you look at Tik tok's
for you page what you're getting is lots
of content of people who you don't
follow because Instagram's just trying
to keep your
attention Tik Tok they're just trying to
keep your attention so if you understand
that if you understand that the the
platform let's go back to Instagram the
platform wants to keep you on the
platform longer and they know if they
just show you more of the people you
already
follow you're probably not going to stay
long you need to see more exciting
better content elevated content content
that's even better than your friends and
the people you already know who you're
following am I right like the people you
already follow they're great but like
when you're really captivated by a piece
of content it's usually somebody you're
not yet following and you might not
follow them the irony is for the last
several years all of us have been trying
to find ways to hack the system and to
get Instagram to show our content to
people who weren't already following us
but you would look at at the graph my
content was only going to people who
were already following me which was
great but you know you want to reach new
people you don't want to keep serving up
the same content to the same people
who've seen your offer or who have seen
your content and eventually it becomes
stale to them so we we were always
trying desperately to get Instagram to
show our content to nonf followers well
that's what they're doing so in some
regards we should be happy because this
is what we wanted right like didn't we
want Instagram to show us to new people
and we thought we would get all of these
new followers no they are yes showing
your content to non-followers which is
great but
non-followers are not the same as they
were like 2 three four five six years
ago non-followers just like you and I
were stingy with our follow but we're
still
watching so don't be discouraged because
yes this is happening so let me show you
an example of my account in just the
last month and this is just my account I
can show you countless other people's
but I have permission to show you mine
but I used to get maybe between two at
the maximum maybe 7% non-followers
seeing my content Instagram was only
showing it to my existing followers well
now that trend has completely shifted
and they're showing my content to
non-followers
what this means for me is is good news
or I'm having people see my content
who've never seen it before it's
improving my business even though my
Instagram engagement looks bleak and so
the most important advice that I can
give you is to stop looking at Instagram
insights in the way that we did last
year or the year before or the year
before where we were so focused on new
followers we were so focused on likes
and comments and today I really think
you should just be looking at how many
people are brand new looking at your
account and worrying less about whether
they follow and focusing instead on how
you can use their attention it's free
advertising Instagram is literally
showing people who've never seen you
never heard about you they're showing
them your content
so what we need to do is take advantage
of this knowing that people are less
likely to follow what they are more
likely to do in these cases is to ask
like what's in it for me like okay so
what am I getting out of this content
it's time to focus on using your
premiums your optins and your lead Pages
lead magnets ways to grow your business
let's face it you're not going to make a
ton of money nobody's making a ton of
money unless they're not even if you
have millions and millions of followers
on Instagram Instagram is not paying you
for those
views the way to make money the way to
monetize your Instagram is to have
something that people who are watching
your Instagram are like oh I want to
train with that person oh I want to
learn how to do that oh I want to do
business with that person oh I want that
service so if you're creating on
Instagram and trying to grow your
business grow your reach on Instagram
know that Instagram is at least for the
foreseeable near future showing your
content to more non-followers stop
worrying about the likes stop wor I'm
not telling you to not put in the same
strategies but don't judge yourself and
don't judge the success of your content
based solely on the likes and the
comments I've had one of my most
successful months using Instagram to
grow my business and to grow or to do I
should say u a great job to grow some of
my partners businesses companies that I
you know pay for posts and I've done so
even though this is one of the ugliest
months I've ever had in terms of vanity
metrics but my content is being shown
and your content is being shown to new
people so what specifically am I talking
about I'm talking about creating ways to
get people off of Instagram and onto
your offer whether that's a premium or a
lead Magnet or directly to your sales
Page by the way way I know we're on the
subject of how stingy people are with
like the follow and the Subscribe but
not everyone's stingy some people are
like really generous and and they know
like it it means a lot when you
subscribe like right now if you were to
subscribe to our YouTube channel Brock
and I would be very grateful we spend a
lot of time trying to create content
that we hope serves you uh so you don't
have to spend so much time on social
media so you know the Subscribe button
it's free and it means a lot to us it
really does help the channel so thanks
for doing that all right back to the
show if it's a low ticket offer or
something that people you know like
shoes or makeup or apparel things that
people they see it and they want to buy
it they don't need to get to know you
they just want to know is your company
reputable is this product or service
that you offer is is this what I need
and if it's a low ticket item you can
send people directly to the sales page
one of the continuing best ways to do
that is with many chat and this is not
sponsored by many chat I don't have a
deal with many chat I'm telling you I'm
still using manich chat and I'm also
going to tell you because I don't have a
deal with manychat I'm going to tell you
this I was wondering is many chat
killing my reach is it because of many
chat and which is an automation tool if
you're not familiar with it many chat is
an API it's an approved third-party
service that you can use with Instagram
where when people comment a specific
word you've probably seen this on you
know a million influencers Pages if you
comment a specific word on my page
because I have many chat integrated into
my Instagram platform by the way they're
expanding to Tik Tok when somebody
comments one of those words then when
they check their DM this is all handled
through automation they get a a response
from me which I've written along with a
link they can click on that link and it
takes them wherever it can take them to
a place where they can enter their email
address and download your fremium or can
take you directly you can take them
directly to your sales page or you can
take them directly to another YouTube
video if you comment tribe on my
Instagram account if you just comment
that under any post or send me a DM with
that word you'll get a link to the build
your tribe podcast so give it a try if
you want just go right here to shellene
Johnson and then just anywhere comment
the word tribe and you'll see how it
works or comment hormones or comment
workout or comment leg day like I've got
so many trigger set up that I began to
wonder is it is it many chat because so
many of my friends who are also using
this third party automation they're
experiencing the same dilemma that I am
so I'm I'm thinking well maybe maybe it
is many chat but I have to tell you
based on like doing a deep dive into
their content doing a deep dive into my
content asking everyone I know and you
know it's probably a good handful at
least 15 people that I've had a
conversation with in the last two weeks
and asking them do you think it's many
CH what's going on tell me about your
stats not do you think it is like go
look at your stats and tell me if this
is happening fill in the blank and to be
honest I don't think it's many chat I
really think that's right now it's those
are still my very best posts in terms of
new followers in terms of still reaching
brand new people non-followers in terms
of Engagement and comments so what I do
think is happening is this the Instagram
algorithm is currently focused on
showing your content to non-followers so
you're going to skew more in that
direction than you are your existing
followers existing followers they are
more likely to like your post comment on
your post share your post the nonf
follower which is you and I it's a lot
tougher to get a follow from
them but if you have something that they
want you've got to make it really easy
for them to get it so that's why I
encourage you to use many chat or to use
whatever system you maybe it's
you know a stand link maybe you're
sending people to the link in your bio
maybe you're you're putting a call to
action or maybe even a web or domain
name like a really easy short pretty
link that you're putting in your
captions like go to shen.com
MIDI or SL oil whatever it like
something really easy for people to
remember when they see it on the screen
and just type that in whatever the case
the way to respond to this change in the
algorithm is to have a change or a shift
in your mindset as it relates to social
media and your business focus on
creating new premiums focus on pulling
up content that's worked for you in the
past you can Replay that you can
repurpose that content now Instagram
recently came out and made a statement
that they they've made it very clear
they don't want you to repurpose
somebody else's content so that's why
feature accounts you're seeing those not
do as well meme accounts you know
accounts that just posted reposted
people's funny stuff it it's tougher to
make that work Instagram frowns upon it
but when it comes to reposting your own
content it's free game and you've got so
many now new non-followers seeing that
content that you should definitely take
advantage of this and let's face it you
start to lose motivation to create new
content when your likes are down and
your views are down you can be very
discouraging but I want you to know it's
happening to everyone
it's not you so don't be discouraged
with yourself don't be discouraged with
your content instead have a shift in
your thinking and focus on using this to
get yourself motivated to be creating
new premiums new lead magnets new ways
to attract your customers new calls to
action new ways to get people who are
looking at your content to become your
customers because ultimately isn't that
why we run social media anyways I mean I
don't know about you but I have to
remind myself sometimes like I don't
care about likes likes don't pay the
bills when somebody sees my content and
they're like hey I want to I want to
work with this person hey I want I want
to learn more about Instagram I want to
be on The Cutting Edge I want to know
what's happening before you know I lose
my mind and I find out and that trend is
already over that's why I'm here on
social media to help people understand
like what it is I offer and specifically
that is an Instagram coaching membership
so you know I guess it's a perfect plug
at this moment for the insta clubhub it
is by far the best deal on the internet
if I do say so myself like we overd
deliver we've got a lot of specials
going on right now anyways I digress all
of that back to you to remind you that
we're we're not on social media to be
popular and it can really be a dopamine
hit when you get a bunch of likes and
people are saying nice things but why
remind yourself that the why is to grow
your business so use this as free
advertising
think of it as just like a commercial
right we we don't get to like physically
like commercials or leave a comment on a
commercial when we see a commercial we
make a mental note until we see it again
then we make a mental note till we see
it again and then eventually we're like
okay where can I get that thing and we
go online and we buy that thing think of
your social media as a commercial and
it's an opportunity to get that viewer
and put them on your email list because
that that's something you own we don't
own social media
platforms to make matters worse this
week I was placed on ban on Instagram
they sent me a notification that they
were not going to be showing my content
to any new non-followers because I had
used the word um that starts with an S
and ends with an X talking about women's
hormones I mean really literally so they
banned my account and and I I've
appealed it we'll see
but it was just a reminder to me
like at any moments notice and I know
you hear this and you've heard this from
us many times your account could be
banned it could be hacked the algorithm
could change so while we do have
attention from non-followers use it
redirect it focus on creating better uh
lead magnets better offers better
irresistible offers for your customers
and if you do have a high ticket offer
consider creating something that's a low
ticket offer where people don't have to
be on your email list and you don't have
to allow them to get to know you for
months and years offer them something
that's so affordable like our $7 insta
clubhub trial yeah if you click the link
below this video you can try for $7 and
and you can see for yourself what
exactly the insta clubhub is all about
but I think it's a great way to turn a
customer into a a lowrisk
opportunity for them to experience your
business so lastly don't be discouraged
I I know it's frustrating trust me
especially when you spend hours creating
content my recommendation is not to stop
doing that because frankly it's really
gotten competitive out there people want
high quality content with a strong hook
something that's funny something that
sharew worthy that they're going to send
to their friends it's got to have value
it's got to grab their attention it's
got to be visually appealing it's a lot
I know so instead of focusing on
quantity focus on quality if you need to
take a day off create a you know real
every other day Carousel posts are also
performing well experiment but more than
anything focus on building your email
list focus on your customers and not
those vanity metrics so that's what's
happening on most people's Instagram but
what's happening on your Instagram
comment below and tell me all about it